Introduction

How should mathematics be taught in Filipino classrooms? It is a subject whose mere utterance instills fear and anxiety in students nationwide. In a country that ranks amongst the lowest in Mathematical acuity (Schwab, n.d.), the notion that Mathematical pursuits can be anything but arduous is foreign to many, student or otherwise. There seems to be a normalized cognitive bias against Mathematics (SOURCE) that often results to the propagation of negative attitudes against its study and practice. This bias  inhibits academic performance and further germinates the former - a negative feedback loop. Studies show that Filipino students believe in the importance of Mathematics and its permeating need in daily life but do not possess the competence nor the desire to actively enjoy practicing the subject (Alova, 2021). Failing to ammend the current state of Mathematics in the Philippines may serve as a crippling blight for the youth as the country advances and the importance of technical fields grow.

<<<<<<< HEAD
Mathematics in the Philippines is often disproportionately examined under the lens of rigor (SOURCES). Its instruction, though, throughout history, been rooted to the idea that students, with the use of skills developed in class, may be able to learn and adapt in order to solve spontaneous problems (SOURCE). This core facet of Mathematical education, where intellectual flexibility is the dominating motivator, is largely absent from teaching methods popularly employed in the Philippines (SOURCE). (SOURCES) affirm that educators easily develop fixations on the procedural aspects of mathematics, stifling many young learners with numerous step-by-step routines that seem wholly disconnected from reality. And as educators neglect to create intellectually taxing learning environments, critical thinking skills fail to be developed (SOURCE). SOURCES) further elaborate that Mathematics education in the Philippines does not place enough emphasis on active learning and classroom practices that challenge cognitive faculties that are responsible for the development of critical thinking skills. This unfortunate mismarriage between boring procedure and the eager minds of adolescent pupiles sustains a culture where the disinterest and often total disregard for the academic value of Mathematics is the norm.
=======
The instruction of Mathematics has, throughout history, been linked to the idea that students, with the use of skills developed in class, may be able to learn and adapt in order to solve problems. (Tripathi, n.d.) posits that all Mathematics educators must constantly question themselves if the Mathematics they teach lead to the enhancement of students' cognitive abilities. Ideally, the students, when presented with a new situation, must be able to delve into previously learned Mathematical schema (in terms of concepts, processes, and ideas). Afterwhich, students must be ready to mold their existing knowledge in order to quantify new problems and formulate new solutions.

This framework of learning is most conducive to the development of critical thinking skills in students. Yet, instructors in Mathematics often struggle to create active learning environments that constantly demand for such skills (Willingham, D. T. n.d.). 

Mathematics is a fundamental component of [[cognitive development]] for Filipino students today, yet the subject is often misinterpreted as a series of steps to be abstracted and forgotten after examinations. The critical importance of teaching Mathematics lies in the subject's 
>>>>>>> 24b92b7a10986b71f25b9f4d150681a98c3f469b

Mathematics is a fundamental component of [[cognitive development]] for Filipino students today (SOURCE), yet the subject is often misinterpreted as a series of steps to be abstracted and forgotten after examinations by teachers and students alike. The vital importance of Mathematics as a tool to enhance critical thinking skills is lost as educators instruct students in manners not conducive to its development. Critical thinking is a learned skill that requires instruction and practice. Educators in the field can nurture critical thinking skills by (i) using instructional strategies that actively engage students in the learning process rather than relying on lecture and note memorization, (ii) focusing instruction on the process of learning rather than solely on the content, and (iii) using assessment techniques that provide students with an intellectual challenge rather than memory recall (Ebiendele Ebosele Peter, 2012). Filipino Mathematics education must graduate from a reliance on memory allocation and retrieval and move onto ensuring the students' conceptual understanding of topics. This reality may only be achieved once educators dispose of the mindset that remembering is synonymous to learning. 




### Citations:
Schwab, K. (n.d.). _The Global Competitiveness Report_. 393.

SEI-DOST & MATHTED, (2011). Framework for philippine mathematics teacher education. Manila: SEI-DOST & MATHTED.

Ebiendele Ebosele Peter. (2017). Critical thinking: Essence for teaching mathematics and mathematics problem solving skills. _African Journal of Mathematics and Computer Science Research_, _5_(3). [https://doi.org/10.5897/AJMCSR11.161](https://doi.org/10.5897/AJMCSR11.161)

“Adelaide Research & Scholarship: Classroom Practices in Mathematics: Effects on Elementary and Secondary School Students’ Achievement in Mathematics in Region XII, Philippines.” Accessed November 22, 2021. [https://digital.library.adelaide.edu.au/dspace/handle/2440/121342](https://digital.library.adelaide.edu.au/dspace/handle/2440/121342).